Completer setup guide (#150)
eWaterCycle/ewatercycle: docs/system_setup.rst

System setup
============

> To use ewatercycle package you need to setup the system with software

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use eWaterCycle package you need to setup the system with software
```

and data.

> This chapter is for system administators or Research Software Engineers who need to setup a system for the eWatercycle platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This chapter is for system administrators or Research Software Engineers who need to set up a system for the eWaterCycle platform.
```

The setup steps:

1.  `Conda environment <#conda-environment>`__
2.  `Install ewatercycle package <#install-ewatercycle-package>`__
3.  `Configure ESMValTool <#configure-ESMValTool>`__
4.  `Download climate data <#download-climate-data>`__
5.  `Install container engine <#install-container-engine>`__
6.  `Configure ewatercycle <#configure-ewatercycle>`__
7.  `Model container images <#model-container-images>`__
8.  `Download example parameter sets <#download-example-parameter-sets>`__
9.  `Prepare other parameter sets <#prepare-other-parameter-sets>`_
10. `Download example forcing <#download-example-forcing>`__
11. `Download observation data <#download-observation-data>`__

Conda environment
-----------------

> The ewatercycle Python package uses a lot of geospatial dependencies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The eWaterCycle Python package uses a lot of geospatial dependencies
```

> which can be installed easiest using `Conda <https://conda.io/>`__ package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which can be installed using `Conda <https://conda.io/>`__ package
```

management system.

> Instal Conda by using the `miniconda

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Install Conda by using the `miniconda
```

> installer <https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html>`__. For more thourough instuctions see `HPC to cluster <hpc_to_cluster.rst>`_ chapter.

Reviewer: I think that the instructions in HPC to cluster should be removed from this part. They are not about conda installation.

Author: There is a install conda section at https://ewatercycle.readthedocs.io/en/latest/hpc_to_cluster.html#first-run-preparations, which I tried to point to. Now updated hpc_to_cluster.rst with same install eWaterCycle package instructions

After conda is installed you can install the software dependencies with
a `conda environment
file <https://github.com/eWaterCycle/ewatercycle/blob/master/environment.yml>`__.

.. code:: shell

    wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eWaterCycle/ewatercycle/master/environment.yml

.. code:: shell

    conda env create --file environment.yml

.. code:: shell

    conda activate ewatercycle

> Do not forget that any terminal or Jupyter kernel should activate the conda environment before the ewatercycle Python package can be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Do not forget that any terminal or Jupyter kernel should activate the conda environment before the eWaterCycle Python package can be used.
```

> Install ewatercycle package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Install eWaterCycle package
```

---------------------------

The Python package can be installed using pip

.. code:: shell

    # TODO once released install from PyPi instead of GitHub
    # pip install ewatercycle
    pip install git+https://github.com/eWaterCycle/ewatercycle.git#egg=ewatercycle

Configure ESMValTool
--------------------

ESMValTool is used to generate forcing (temperature, precipitation,

> etc.) files from climate data sets for hydrological models. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
etc.) files from climate data for hydrological models. The
```

ESMValTool has been installed as a dependency of the package.

See https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/quickstart/configuration.html

> how configure ESMValTool

Reviewer: ```suggestion
how configure ESMValTool.
```

Download climate data
---------------------

> The ERA5 and ERA-Interim climate datasets can be used to generate
> forcings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ERA5 and ERA-Interim data can be used to generate
forcings.
```

ERA5
~~~~

To download ERA5 data files you can use the
`era5cli <https://era5cli.readthedocs.io/>`__ tool.

.. code:: shell

    pip install era5cli

> To run the example notebooks the hourly ERA5 data files for year 1990
> and 1991 and for variables: pr, psl, tas, taxmin, tasmax, tdps, uas,
> vas, rsds, rsdt and fx orog need to be downloaded with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an example, the hourly ERA5 data for the years 1990
and 1991 and for variables pr, psl, tas, taxmin, tasmax, tdps, uas,
vas, rsds, rsdt and fx orog are downloaded as:
```
```suggestion
To run the example notebooks the hourly ERA5 data files for year 1990
and 1991 and for variables: pr, psl, tas, taxmin, tasmax, tdps, uas,
vas, rsds, rsdt and fx orog need to be downloaded with
```

Author: added

.. code:: shell

    # TODO is era5cli command is correct?
    cd <ESMValTool raw directory>
    era5cli hourly --startyear 1990 --endyear 1991 --variables pr psl tas taxmin tasmax tdps uas vas rsds rsdt orog
    cd -

.. code:: shell

    # TODO cmorize files?

> 

Reviewer: Hourly ERA5 does not need cmorizer anymore. But we need to generate daily cmorized data: using recipe_era5.yml or recipe_daily_era5.yml if this [PR] in esmvaltool (https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pull/2182) gets merged.

Author: Did it

ERA-Interim
~~~~~~~~~~~

ERA-Interim has been superseeded by ERA5, but could be useful for
reproduction studies and its smaller size. The ERA-Interim data files
can be downloaded at

> https://www.ecmwf.int/en/forecasts/datasets/reanalysis-datasets/era-interim

Reviewer: We can download the ERA-Interim using [download script](https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/blob/main/esmvaltool/cmorizers/obs/download_scripts/download_era_interim.py) in esmvaltool and then cmorize it by [cmorizer](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/input.html#using-a-cmorizer-script).

Author: Thanks pointed to those

> Installing a container engine requires root permission on the machine.

Reviewer: This line should be moved to the next section.

Author: done

Install container engine
------------------------

> In ewatercycle package the hydrological models are run in containers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In eWaterCycle package, the hydrological models are run in containers
```

with engines like `Singularity <https://singularity.lbl.gov/>`__ or
`Docker <https://www.docker.com/>`__. At least Singularity or Docker
should be installed.

Singularity
~~~~~~~~~~~

Install Singularity using
`instructions <https://singularity.hpcng.org/user-docs/master/quick_start.html>`__.

Docker
~~~~~~

Install Docker using
`instructions <https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/>`__. Docker
should be configured so it can be `called without
sudo <https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/linux-postinstall/#manage-docker-as-a-non-root-user>`__

> Configure ewatercycle

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configure eWaterCycle
```

---------------------

> The ewatercycle package simplifies the API by reading some of the
> directories and other configurations from a configuration file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The eWaterCycle package simplifies the API by reading some of the
directories and settings from a configuration file.
```

Reviewer 2: Maybe elaborate a bit more on "the API" here

    ewatercycle.CFG['singularity_dir'] = './singularity-images'
    # Directory in which output of model runs is stored. Each model run will generate a sub directory inside output_dir
    ewatercycle.CFG['output_dir'] = './'
    # Where can GRDC observation files (<station identifier>_Q_Day.Cmd.txt) be found.
    ewatercycle.CFG['grdc_location'] = './grdc-observations'
    # Where can parameters sets prepared by the system administator be found
    ewatercycle.CFG['parameterset_dir'] = './parameter-sets'
    # Where is the configuration saved or loaded from
    ewatercycle.CFG['ewatercycle_config'] = './ewatercycle.yaml'

and then written to disk with

.. code:: ipython3

    ewatercycle.CFG.save_to_file()

Later it can be loaded by using:

.. code:: ipython3

    ewatercycle.CFG.load_from_file('./ewatercycle.yaml')

To make the ewatercycle configuration load by default for current user
it should be copied to ``~/.config/ewatercycle/ewatercycle.yaml`` .

To make the ewatercycle configuration available to all users on the
system it should be copied to ``/etc/ewatercycle.yaml`` .

Configuration file for Cartesius system
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Users part of the ewatercycle project on the Cartesius system of
> SURFSara can use the following configuration file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users part of the eWaterCycle project can use the following configurations on the Cartesius system of
SURFSara:
```

.. code:: yaml

   container_engine: singularity
   singularity_dir: /projects/0/wtrcycle/singularity-images
   output_dir: /scratch/shared/ewatercycle
   grdc_location: /projects/0/wtrcycle/GRDC
   parameterset_dir: /projects/0/wtrcycle/parameter-sets

Configuration file for ewatecycle Jupyter machine
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> On systems constructed with ewatercycle application on SURF Research
> Cloud can use the following configuration file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users can use the following configurations on systems constructed with eWaterCycle application on SURF Research
Cloud:
```

.. code:: yaml

   container_engine: singularity
   singularity_dir: /mnt/data/singularity-images
   output_dir: /scratch
   grdc_location: /mnt/data/GRDC
   parameterset_dir: /mnt/data/parameter-sets

Model container images
----------------------

> As hydrological models run in container their container images should be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As hydrological models run in containers, their container images should be
```

made available on the system.

The names of the images can be found in the ``ewatercycle.models.*``
classes.

Docker
~~~~~~

Docker images will be downloaded with ``docker pull``:

.. code:: shell

    docker pull ewatercycle/lisflood-grpc4bmi:20.10
    docker pull ewatercycle/marrmot-grpc4bmi:2020.11
    docker pull ewatercycle/pcrg-grpc4bmi:setters
    docker pull ewatercycle/wflow-grpc4bmi:2020.1.1
    # TODO

Singularity
~~~~~~~~~~~

Singularity images should be stored in configured directory
(``ewatercycle.CFG['singularity_dir']``) and can build from Docker with:

.. code:: ipython3

    !cd {ewatercycle.CFG['singularity_dir']}
    !singularity build ewatercycle-lisflood-grpc4bmi.sif docker://ewatercycle/lisflood-grpc4bmi:latest
    !singularity build ewatercycle-pcrg-grpc4bmi.sif docker://ewatercycle/pcrg-grpc4bmi:latest
    !singularity build ewatercycle-marrmot-grpc4bmi.sif docker://ewatercycle/marrmot-grpc4bmi:latest

>     !singularity build ewatercycle-wflow-grpc4bmi.sif docker://ewatercycle/wflow-grpc4bmi:latest

Reviewer: Shall we use the model versions as the tag instead of `latest`?

Author: Now using same labels as used in model classes

      wflow_rhine_sbm_nc:
        config: wflow_rhine_sbm_nc/wflow_sbm_NC.ini
        directory: wflow_rhine_sbm_nc
        doi: N/A
        supported_model_versions: !!set {2020.1.1: null}
        target_model: wflow
    parameterset_dir: /home/verhoes/git/eWaterCycle/ewatercycle/docs/examples/parameter-sets
    singularity_dir: None

.. code:: ipython3

    ewatercycle.parameter_sets.available_parameter_sets()

.. parsed-literal::

    ('wflow_rhine_sbm_nc', 'pcrglobwb_example_case', 'lisflood_fraser')

.. code:: ipython3

    parameter_set = ewatercycle.parameter_sets.get_parameter_set('pcrglobwb_example_case')
    parameter_set

.. parsed-literal::

    ParameterSet(name='pcrglobwb_example_case', directory=PosixPath('/home/verhoes/git/eWaterCycle/ewatercycle/docs/examples/parameter-sets/pcrglobwb_example_case'), config=PosixPath('/home/verhoes/git/eWaterCycle/ewatercycle/docs/examples/parameter-sets/pcrglobwb_example_case/setup_natural_test.ini'), doi='N/A', target_model='pcrglobwb', supported_model_versions={'setters'})

The ``parameter_set`` variable can be passed to a model class
constructor.

Prepare other parameter sets
----------------------------

> The example pararmeter sets downloaded in previous section are nice to show off the plaform features, but are a bit small.
> To preform more advanced experiments additonal parameter sets are needed.
> Users could use :py:class:`ewatercycle.parameter_sets.ParameterSet` to construct parameter sets themselves.
> Or they can be made available via :py:func:`ewatercycle.parameter_sets.available_parameter_sets` and :py:func:`ewatercycle.parameter_sets.get_parameter_set` by extending the configuration file (ewatercycle.yaml).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example parameter sets downloaded in the previous section are nice to show off the platform features but are a bit small.
To perform more advanced experiments, additional parameter sets are needed.
Users could use :py:class:`ewatercycle.parameter_sets.ParameterSet` to construct parameter sets themselves.
Or they can be made available via :py:func:`ewatercycle.parameter_sets.available_parameter_sets` and :py:func:`ewatercycle.parameter_sets.get_parameter_set` by extending the configuration file (ewatercycle.yaml).
```

A new parameter set should be added as a key/value pair in the `parameter_sets` map of the configuration file.
The key should be a unique string on the current system.
The value is a dictionary with the following items:

> * directory: Location on disk where files of parameter set are stored. If Path is relative then relative to :py:const:`ewatercycle.CFG['parameterset_dir']`.
> * config: Model configuration file which uses files from directory. If Path is relative then relative to :py:const:`ewatercycle.CFG['parameterset_dir']`.
> * doi: Persistent identifier of parameter set. For a example a DOI for a Zenodo record.
> * target_model: Name of model that parameter set can work with
> * supported_model_versions: Set of model versions that are supported by this parameter set. If not set then parameter set will be supported by all versions of model

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* directory: Location on disk where files of the parameter set are stored. If Path is relative then relative to :py:const:`ewatercycle.CFG['parameterset_dir']`.
* config: Model configuration file which uses files from directory. If Path is relative then relative to :py:const:`ewatercycle.CFG['parameterset_dir']`.
* doi: Persistent identifier of the parameter set. For example a DOI for a Zenodo record.
* target_model: Name of the model that parameter set can work with
* supported_model_versions: Set of model versions that are supported by this parameter set. If not set then parameter set will be supported by all versions of model
```
